~{{frontmatter
layout: default
title: Virtual Transport
nav_order: 15
permalink: /virtual-transport}}~

~{{layout type=newpage}}~
# Virtual Transport

The Virtual Transport uses the
[TUN/TAP](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/networking/tuntap.txt)
interface to create a *virtual interface* (*vif*) as the emulation
boundary entry/exit point.

## Features

The Virtual Transport emulation boundary provides the following set of
features: [Virtual Interface
Management](#virtual-interface-management), [Raw Transport
Interoperability](#raw-transport-interoperability), [Bitrate
Enforcement](#bitrate-enforcement), [Broadcast Only
Mode](#broadcast-only-mode), and [IPv4 and IPv6
Capable](#ipv4-and-ipv6-capable).

## Virtual Interface Management

The Virtual Transport creates a virtual interface for use as the
emulation boundary. IP packets routed to the virtual device are
encapsulated and transmitted to their respective *NEM* for downstream
processing. Packets received over-the-air are processed up the *NEM*
stack and transmitted to the *NEM*'s respective virtual transport for
injection back into the kernel IP stack.

The newly created virtual interface is assigned an Ethernet address
derived from the *NEM Id* associated with the transport using the
following format: `02:02:00:00:XX:XX` , where `XX:XX` is the 16 bit
*NEM Id*. This allows easy mapping of Ethernet MAC addresses to NEM Ids
for unicast frames. Multicast and broadcast frames map to the NEM
broadcast address `0xFFFF`.

A Virtual Transport managed virtual interface can be configured via
configuration parameters or managed externally, for example via DHCP.

## Raw Transport Interoperability

The Virtual Transport supports interoperability with ~{{link name="Raw
Transport" file="raw-transport.md" section="#raw-transport"}}~
emulation boundaries using ARP caching to learn IP network to *NEM Id*
associations.

### Bitrate Enforcement

The Virtual Transport supports bitrate enforcement for use with models
that do not limit bitrate based on emulation implementation. Set the
configuration parameter `bitrate` to the desired rate in `bps` to
enable bitrate enforcement or 0 to disable.

### Broadcast Only Mode

The Virtual Transport supports forced *NEM* broadcasting of all IP
packet types: unicast, broadcast and multicast. Set the configuration
parameter `broadcastmodeenable` to `true` to enable broadcast only
mode.

### IPv4 and IPv6 Capable

The Virtual Transport supports IPv4 and IPv6 virtual interface address
assignments and packet processing.

## Configuration

~{{emaneinfo plugin=transvirtual type=config}}~

## Statistics

~{{emaneinfo plugin=transvirtual type=stat}}~

## Statistic Tables

~{{emaneinfo plugin=transvirtual type=table}}~

